I'm willing to bet that as soon as you entered this place, you knew that we were going to get some answers in the shadow of the Erd Tree. And we have. There are satisfying revelations regarding Queen Marika and Mickela and the Omen and dragons and the gods. We even now know what Melania whispered to Radan in this scene before her scarlet flower bloomed in Caelid. This video will only scratch the surface. It's just an overview, a teaser of new revelations and the foreshadowing of a deeper analysis to come. So, let's get into it, and this time, let's begin at the end. After you defeat the final boss, promised consort Radan, on your 400th attempt, you can read the remembrance of a god and a lord, which states, In their childhood, Mickela saw in Radan a lord. His strength and his kindness that stood in stark contrast with their afflicted selves. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. The cutscene that plays here is a memory. If your want is taken away, what is left of you that remains? Perhaps the saddest example of this is Moog, who, as we speculated, was indeed under Mikkula's spell. Once, in an attempt to free Lord Moog from his enchantment, I challenged tender Mikkula, only to have my own heart rather artfully stolen. I knew not how weak I was. I believed that with sufficient mastery, even an Empyrean would be within reach of my blade. I could not have been more mistaken. Mikkula the kind is a monster. Pure and radiant. He wields love to shrive clean the hearts of men. There is nothing more terrifying. In the specimen storehouse, you can find the Secret Rite Scroll, which details the secret rite by which Mikkula will ascend to godhood. It reads: "A lord will usher in a god's return, and the lord's soul will require a vessel." Hans Buck reveals Mikkula's plans in full. After Lord Moog's slaying at his dynastic palace, it appears his body has been absconded with, "and taken straight to kind Mikkula." "As if using Lord Moog to gain entrance to the land of shadow were not enough, he plans to use his corpse as the vessel of his king consort. He has forsaken Lord Moog's soul. He desires only his empty shell." In your fight with Radhan, you might have noticed the horns sprouting from his gauntlets, and his tendency to perform blood flame attacks. This is because Radhan occupies Moog's body, fulfilling the terms of the Secret Rite at the Gate of Divinity, where Mikkula will become a god. So, in retrospect, Moog was under Mikkula's spell all along, and became obsessed with Mikkula, believing that they would ascend together as Lord and God. But Mikkula had plans for Moog, not just as a corpse to pull into the realm of shadow as a vessel for Radhan's soul, but as Ansbach reveals, Moog was also used as a means for Mikkula to enter the realm of shadow in the first place. A while back, I speculated that the realm of shadow was a sort of death dimension, and that Mikkula's sacrilegious death at the hands of Moog might have been intentional so that Mikkula could enter the realm of shadow, and, actually surprisingly, those speculations were proven correct as well. Ansbach confirms that Moog enabled Mikkula to enter, and the Tower of Suppression makes it clear that all manners of death wash up in the realm of shadow, which lies at the very center of the lands between. Incidentally, Radhan's return also answers one of the biggest mysteries of Elden Ring, which was what Melania whispered to Radhan as she let the rot flower blossom at the end of their fight. According to the young lion's helm, she whispered, "Mikkula awaits thee, her promised consort." And so, Melania's southward march to Caelid is finally explained as well. She was there to kill Radhan so that his soul could be taken to the realm of shadow, and the vow could be upheld at any cost. Once transported to the realm of shadow, Mikkula set off for the Tower. And as his great rune says, "The way he abandoned everything: his golden flesh, his blinding strength, even his fate, his own fate, and his own fate." "Mikkula has said as much himself. He wishes now to throw it all away. He says the act, though undoubtedly painful, will sear clean the Erd Tree's wanton sin. The truth of his claim can be found at each cross, which is evidence enough to earn my belief." What was the Erd Tree's sin? That Mikkula died and was reborn for? Well, now we've talked about the end, this brings us to the beginning. "Mikkula the kind spoke of the beginning. The seduction, and the betrayal. An affair from which gold arose. And so too was shadow born. Who was shadow born?" These words come from Leda. And while she never says them in game, they're pretty damn important, because with Marika in the footage, it's clear that this was her seduction, and her betrayal. That was the affair from which gold arose, and shadow was born. The same music that played in that moment also plays here, in the village where it all began. The shaman village, to the northeast. The center is this, a minor Erd tree. An incantation which reveals that this was Marika's home, which she one day bathed in gold. So, Marika's home was a shaman village. The implication clearly being that she herself was a shaman. This was likely a matriarchal society of other Numen women, though that's perhaps speculation better left for another video. Put simply though, a shaman is defined as someone who has influence in matters of the spirit. Their spirituality is what's valued here. And it's on this point that this story takes a bit of a dark turn. For the message at the hidden entrance actually reads, "Have mercy for the spirited away shamans." Adjacent to this message is the statue that moves aside at the sign of the "Oh Mother" gesture in Mesmer's shadow keep. This emote is a clue to the truth, and it actually leads us all the way down here to where the "Oh Mother" gesture can be found. This dire place is called Bonnie Village. And a phantom at the "Whipping Hut" here elaborates on just who the shamans were. Or rather, the value they had. He states, "For pity's sake, your place is in the jar. Nigh's sainthood itself awaits you within. For shamans like you, this is your lot. Life were you accorded for this alone." So the shamans, in the words of their abusers at least, were accorded life for a singular purpose. And that was to be stuffed inside of jars with others. A nearby whip, bestrewn with rotting, misshapen teeth, elaborates on how and why it was used on the shamans. For one, it states that the pain it inflicts was used to encourage their obedience. But additionally, it says that as their wounds ripen, they grow inflamed and ooze pus. And the flesh of shamans was said to meld harmoniously with others. So it is that the shamans stuffed into jars become this living amalgam of beings. Presumably with the flayed shaman herself at the fore. So now we know what happened to the shamans. They were whipped into submission and forced inside of jars. We know a little bit of the why as well. Apparently it was done so that they could become saints. But the next question I want to answer is who? Who did this to them? Well, it was the horn scent. The caterpillar mask, worn by horn scent himself, reveals that it was a ritual implement of the greater potentates of Bonnie Village. Which is this very village where we just discussed the evidence of the shaman's abuse. It goes on to state that the mask was used to ward off thoughts of impurity, doubt, temptation and other wickedness one is vulnerable to while absorbed in divine ritual. And man, if you need to ward off thoughts of doubt and wickedness while you're stuffing flayed people inside of jars, maybe what you're doing is just straight up wrong. I'm starting to understand why Marika purged the realm of shadow with fire. It's as Leta says. They were never saints. They just happened to be on the losing side of a war. But if this mask wasn't proof enough of the horn scent being responsible, look at Bellarat Jail. It's below Bellarat itself, which was the settlement of the horn scent, and to this day the innards and the shamans remain. With the shamans offering their prayers to the innards of the great jars, such that they might be reborn one day into sainthood. But what is sainthood? Well, it's never explained directly. I do have some ideas, but they might have to wait for another video. What we do know is that the horn scent were obsessed with invoking divinity, and forcing the shamans to achieve sainthood was likely one facet of that. So, it's the horn scent that we need to discuss next. The horn scent are an extremely ritualistic people, with swaths of their culture devoted to spiritual research and invoking the divine. And one of the most sacred things to them is the crucible, which they have to thank for their tangled horns, which are considered an evolutionary gift. If you didn't know, the crucible has been long established as this primordial form of the Erdtree, a blending of life that became the Erdtree's primal vital energies. And apparently, it originated in the place that became the realm of shadow. This becomes quite clear thanks to Devonia, who is the longest serving of the crucible knights. According to her helmet, she quested in search of the crucible's origin, and departed from the lands of the Erdtree alone. Another item we can find that's a clue for the crucible is Spira, an incantation for a spiral of light. The spiral, it says, is a normalized crucible current that, one day, will form a column that stretches to the gods. Maybe it's no coincidence that the White Tower of Bellarat is a spiral, nor that it culminates in a divine gateway that is a column of the dead stretching to the gods. There's also trees that include the dead, but I digress, I'm getting off topic. Back to Marika, because at some point it seems Marika rose to prominence within, or adjacent to, this Hornsent culture. We can kind of infer this because Hornsent refer to Marika's eventual purge as a betrayal. And something can only really be a betrayal if you were aligned with them in the first place, right? So, the Hornsent were aware of Marika, and likely her Erdtree as well, before what they call the betrayal. But how? How did Marika rise to such power in their homeland, where she was presumably a shaman, one of those subjugated? Well, before there was this betrayal, there was a seduction, from which gold arose, and I think the fingers had a hand in it. "I fear that you have borne witness to the whole of it. The conceits, the hypocrisy of the world built upon the Erdtree. The follies of men. Their bitter suffering. Is there no hope for redemption? The answer, sadly, is clear. There never was any hope. There were each of them defective, unhinged from the start. Marika herself, and the fingers that guided her. And this is what troubles me. No matter our efforts, if the roots are rotten, then we have little recourse." "Emir is the High Priest of Manus Meta, a Cathedral of the Hand to the East. Once he instructed Relana herself in the Sorcerous Arts, but eventually he would come to abandon this allegiance to the Moon, stating that the Moon was merely the closest of the Celestians. The Moon was the Celestians. And nothing more. "I am a Glintstone Sorcerer. We study the stars, and examine the life therein. Are you familiar with our findings?" "Long ago, we began as Stardust, born of a great rupture far across the skies. We, too, are children of the greater will. Is that not divine? Is that not sublime? And yet, none can fathom its implications. Its utter brilliance." "In the ruins of this land, and beneath Manus Meta itself, are the echoes of that greater truth that Ymir glimpsed. This is Meta herself, the Mother of Fingers." "Her Remembrance reads, the Mother of all two Fingers and Finger Creepers was, in turn, a magnificently gleaming daughter of the greater will, and the first shooting star to fall upon the lands between." "You might recall, the Elden Ring and the Elden Beast made landfall in the lands between upon a star as well." "But Meta came even before that." "So it was that this Mother birthed the Fingers, communing with and receiving signs from the greater will, who occupied the great beyond." "But at some point Meta became broken, abandoned, and no sign has come through ever since." "Do you recall what I said? That Marika and the Fingers that guided her were unsound from the start?" "Well, the truth lies deeper still. It is their mother who is damaged and unhinged. The Fingers are but unripe children. Victims in their own right." "It's not clear when Meta was broken, abandoned, but I assume it was before Marika started taking the guidance of the Fingers, since Ymir states that the Fingers were unsound from the start. Thus, the greater will's guidance is outdated at the very least, and has been for all of Marika's reign." "That's a pretty big revelation." "Incidentally, Placidusax was also Elden Lord before Marika, and he was abandoned by his god as well, so maybe things became broken around that time?" "Lots of speculation to be had there." "At any rate, abandonment by the greater will, or no, Marika took up the power of the Elden Ring that the Fingers offered for her own reasons, and the abandoned Fingers spread the glory of the greater will through her, and she through them." "Another important item on this topic is the ancient seed talismans that can be found, which depict the two fingers around an erd tree seed. They had a hand in the birth of the erd tree." All this while, the Fingers claimed to be envoys for the greater will, but that's a lie. The greater will is gone. The Fingers are alone, operating on outdated guidance. This is something that many characters suspected, but most characters in Elden Ring assumed that this happened around the time the Elden Ring was shattered. It's a revelation that the Fingers have been broken for a really long time. And so, the Tarnished 2 is alone, following this guidance of grace that now likely only belongs to Marika herself, if anyone. And Marika might have played friendly with the Horn-Scent for a time, but eventually she had what was surely vengeance, when the Horn-Scent were purged, subjugated, and betrayed. The realm of shadow became this disconnected domain of death, and the shadow tree that looms high became the realm's symbol of abandonment. Not grace. Before she left, Marika bathed the village of her home in gold, placing a small illusory tree that restores the health of those nearby. She did this knowing full well that there was no one left to heal. Then she left, never to return. Not even for her son, who she left behind to endlessly enact her subjugation of the realm of shadow. So, next, let's talk about Mesmer, the Impaler. As anticipated, Mesmer is entirely loyal to his mother, who is Queen Marika. His armor reveals that, on his mother's wishes, Mesmer made himself a symbol of fear, undertaking the cleansing crusade she desired. And, in the end, all those stripped of the grace of gold would perish. In the embrace of Mesmer's flame. To this end, he had his black knights, fire knights, and common infantry. Not to mention the carrion forces who followed R'Elanna into war on Mesmer's behalf. So it was that the Horn-Scent were purged in a war without end. A phantom at Castle Ensus bemoans: "O Marika, I beg, embrace your child, and give us a sign. How long must this holy war stretch on?" But Marika never returned, testing their faith. One phantom even raises the possibility that Mesmer himself has been abandoned. And he has. The final straw for him is when you, a tarnished who would become Elden Lord, arrives at the end. The end of the war arrives at his doorstep. "I will not suffer. A lord devoid of light." "No mother forgives me." "No mother forgives me." "No mother forgives me." "No one of my sins." "No mother forgives me." "No, no." "No." Soon tarnished. Wilt thou be taken in the jaws of the abyssal serpent shorn of light? Like his siblings, Mesmer was born cursed. In fact, the game likens his curse to Melanus, who is heavily implied to be his younger sister. Mesmer too, it is said, bore a vision of fire. We learn this from the item Mesmer's Kindling, which describes the fire that endlessly burns within him, a dark thing eaten away at by a wicked serpent. His remembrance elaborates on this serpent, stating, a malevolent snake writhed within Mesmer. And so his very mother plucked out his eye and put in its place a seal of grace. So I was wrong about this eye. It wasn't the slitted eye of dragon communion. Instead, it was Marika's seal of grace, holding back something terrible. The description continues to state that, even with this seal in place, Marika's fear compelled her to secret away her child within the realm of shadow, hidden away, keeping company with the original sin, and a hatred that would not be confined. There's so much more to say about this base serpent and the dark fire. There's so much more to say about Mesmer. We even learn from Gaius's remembrance that Mesmer was an older brother to Redan, meaning Mesmer's birth, and thus the birth of Melina as well, likely would have arrived much earlier in the timeline. And there's a ton of curiosities with Mesmer's knights as well, some of whom were loyal, some who were disloyal, and some of whom occupied this space of reluctance in between. But those stories are better off in other videos. In the interest of moving on, there is one last thing I want to talk about with Mesmer, and it's that in the cut dialogue, Mesmer notes that Mikula has spoken of us to him. And indeed, we do know that Mikula did come through this shadow keep, divesting himself at the crosses all the while. Which brings us to our next topic. Saint Trina. Each cross of Mikula is a piece of himself, marked with his great rune. Arms, an eye, flesh. But there's a couple of crosses in particular, that I remember as a part of what was an extremely chilling moment. As you progress along the coast, towards the fissure, you notice that Mikula has divested himself of his doubt and vacillation. Without these things, he was free, it seems, to abandon something that was very dear to him. And inside the fissure, at what is perhaps the deepest part of the land in the realm of shadow, we realize that Mikula has actually divested himself of his love. A phantom says, Kindly Mikula, I see you've thrown away something you should not have, under any circumstances. How will you salvation offer to those who cannot be saved, when you could not even save your other self? His other self, his love, his fate, was Saint Trina. So to Mikula, who was one of Marica's kin, having a second self is nothing new, really. We've now even learned from the shamans, that their flesh melds harmoniously with others, after all. Actually, the fact that Saint Trina was able to be discarded, might even suggest that, Radigan, could have become divested, from Marica, in a similar way. But Mikula's other half was truly special, and she was renowned for granting peaceful sleep to many in the lands between, which I imagine would have been very much appreciated, in this land that's filled with the weary undead. So, Saint Trina naturally had many followers, and perhaps at the fore was Tiollier, whose obsession with Saint Trina returns almost immediately, when Mikula's enchantment finally breaks. I'm feeling rather lost, haunted by memories, of Saint Trina, her visage, her sen, the lure of velvety sleep. Would kindly Mikula chase me, for falling for Saint Trina, while knowing that she was the discarded half? The problem is, I simply cannot help it. I would sacrifice everything, just to gaze upon her, one last time. Saint Trina is below, defended by a putrescent knight, who is basically, tainted flesh, once given eternal rest, that, now serves Saint Trina. Die enough times, to Saint Trina's nectar, and, you will hear her words. Make, Mikula, stop. Don't turn the poor thing, into a god. Godhood would be, Mikula's prison. A cage, divinity, is beyond, saving. You must, kill, Mikula. Grant him, forgiveness. All of this, makes you realize, that, if godhood, really would be, Mikula's cage, as Saint Trina believes, then, it really might have been, Marika's cage, as well. It echoes, what the saw seals, suggested, long ago. That, solemn duty, weighs upon, the one beholden. Not unlike, a, gnawing curse, from which, there is no deliverance. In the end, Marika's cage, divinity, is, likely a part, of why, she shattered the olden ring. And so, Mikula's divinity, would, surely come, at a cost, to him. He, would essentially, be sacrificing himself, to, bring about, that gentle age, in the name of, everybody who, would fall, under his enchantment. And, this enchantment, is a tendency, that Mikula regains, when, he returns, in full force, as a god. Because, once charmed, by Mikula, a circlet, of light, adorns your head. And, according to, the description, of the circlet, of light, which, you receive, after Mikula's defeat, this, enchanting circlet, would have been, the, foundation of, Mikula's, age of compassion. Not, the elden ring. Presumably, in his age, all, would be charmed. But, Mikula found one, that would refuse, to be embraced. You, no wonder, as, one god, and one king consort, is all the world needs. And, you're the chosen elden lord, of a different age. Whatever ending, that may be, for you. So, naturally, you would have refused, to be embraced. Thank you for watching, and thank you for listening to me, even with my, nasally, covert voice. Sorry about that. Before I go, Displate currently have, a limited time sale, for, 27% off your first Displate, and, 37% off, for any Displates, after that. And, you'll get that deal, just by clicking the link below. I've commissioned a new design, to celebrate, Shadow of the Ode Tree. This one is called, Eclipse, and, it's this gorgeous, black and white, illustration, commissioned, from Nico Delort. This one has a lot of, easter eggs and, references, hidden within it. How many can you find? And, if you're looking to pick up, a few more Displates, to make use of that discount, check out my other, store offerings as well. I love commissioning, these designs, and, Displates are honestly, great, convenient products, that just, make any space, more interesting. So, check that out. And, again, Please subscribe, for more, Shadow of the Ode Tree lore, because I've, really barely scratched the surface, here today. I really had to restrain myself, from going deeper, into all of these topics, in the interest of, providing a, concise overview, of, all of the lore, and, I didn't even cover all of the lore, it was still tough. Honestly, the most fascinating content, is yet to come. I still want to talk about, how, Bale, the new dragon, in the DLC, is, actually, the father of the drakes, and how, he had a war, with, placidusax. I wish I had time, to talk about, the abyssal forest, and, Midrash Mance, which, the horn sent, locked away. And then, there's Godwin, whose, story, we can actually, say, has come, to a, conclusive end, just by virtue, of, the lack, of new information, we've received, on him. There's, so much more, to every single thing, I've talked about today, and, I encourage you, to go through, the item descriptions, and, seek these answers, yourself, if you're interested, because, ideally, you know, I, won't be, the only source, of information, that you go through. Support, other creators, think critically, about, all of the content, you consume. But, thank you for watching, mine, and, I look forward, to exploring, all of this, with you, in the months to come. Look for another, upload soon. Cheers guys. you Thank you.